Refine major decision process and update TSC composition rules (#2927)
madolson/placeholderkv: GOVERNANCE.md

The TSC members are listed in the [MAINTAINERS.md](MAINTAINERS.md) file in the Valkey repository.
Maintainers (and accordingly, TSC members) may be added or removed by no less than 2/3 affirmative vote of the current TSC.
At any time, no more than one third (1/3) of the TSC members may be employees, contractors, or representatives of the same organization or affiliated organizations.

> For the purposes of this document, “organization” includes companies, corporations, universities, research institutes, non-profits, governmental institutions, and any of their subsidiaries or affiliates.

Reviewer: I agree with copilots suggestion here. I think notifying the TSC to make a decision to make the change makes sense.

> For the purposes of this document, “organization” includes companies, corporations, universities, research institutes, non-profits, governmental institutions, and any of their subsidiaries or affiliates.

Reviewer 2: Yes, good point. We may also need to define what happens if we can't make a decision about how to restore the balance.

For example, to restore the balance we may need to kick someone out (requires 2/3 majority) or add a new member, for which we might not always have a good candidate.

TSC membership is personal and company affiliation is secondary, so maybe it's OK stay in the imbalance for some time until the situation resolves itself naturally?

> For the purposes of this document, “organization” includes companies, corporations, universities, research institutes, non-profits, governmental institutions, and any of their subsidiaries or affiliates.

Reviewer 3: > TSC membership is personal and company affiliation is secondary, so maybe it's OK stay in the imbalance for some time until the situation resolves itself naturally?

I actually like Copilot's wording:

> The TSC should strive to resolve the situation within 30 days of notification, and document the steps taken to restore compliance.

"Strive to resolve within 30 days" seems reasonable given that 2/3 vote may not be feasible. A paper trail of what is being proposed and the attempted votes until the situation resolves makes sense

> For the purposes of this document, “organization” includes companies, corporations, universities, research institutes, non-profits, governmental institutions, and any of their subsidiaries or affiliates.

Author: I like the copilot recommendation too. I have accepted it as-is.

If consensus cannot be reached, the TSC shall make the decision by a vote.

A vote shall also be called when an issue or pull request is marked as a major decision, which are decisions that have a significant impact on the Valkey architecture or design.

Technical major decisions include:
    * Fundamental changes to the Valkey core datastructures
    * Adding a new data structure or API
    * Changes that affect backward compatibility
    * New user visible fields that need to be maintained
    * Adding or removing a new external library such as a client or module to the project when it affects runtime behavior

> For technical major decisions, the TSC may approve a change based on explicit “+2” support from at least two sitting TSC members, recorded on the relevant issue or pull request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For technical major decisions, the TSC may approve a change based on explicit “+2” support from at least two TSC members, recorded on the relevant issue or pull request.
```

A +2 approval is treated as approval of the technical decision by the TSC and may be retracted by a subsequent vote.

> Retraction requires a simple majority vote of all voting members; if the vote results in a tie, the status quo is preserved and the +2 approval is retracted.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, this is ambiguous.

The way I've thought about this +2 rule until now is that it should be a fast track for uncontroversial decisions. If anyone objects, it would immediately trigger a majority vote.

I would wait a week before marking it as approved (and merging a PR) even if two people have already voted "+", to allow the rest of TSC members a chance to object. If anyone objects during this grace period, it would trigger a majority vote before any decision has even been made.

If nobody objected during this grace period, it's fine to mark the decision as approved and merge a PR. After that, I think it would make sense to require a new decision to revert it. That would need a strict majority. It seems weird to allow a draw vote to revert decisions made very long ago.

I don't know if this is too complex or impractical. It feels intuitive to me though. We'd need to define the grace period (1 week?).

> Retraction requires a simple majority vote of all voting members; if the vote results in a tie, the status quo is preserved and the +2 approval is retracted.

Reviewer 3: Yeah I think it should go:

1. `time=T`: Notify TSC of major decision, kickstarting the decision clock
2. `time<T+2 weeks`: Majority approval results in the major decision being approved
3. `time>=T+2 weeks`: Greater than or equal to two yes votes, accompanied with zero no votes, results in approval. If any no vote exists, a majority approval is required

I like 2 weeks since it prevents something like vacation or holiday from making a TSC member's opinion not be incorporated. But 1 week is also fair.

Regarding "retraction" - I think we should remove this language altogether. Any retraction should just be another major decision and follow the same process. Otherwise we get into arguments about what is a "retraction" and what isn't (sometimes it may be a partial retraction, or an addendum to the previous approval).

> Retraction requires a simple majority vote of all voting members; if the vote results in a tie, the status quo is preserved and the +2 approval is retracted.

Reviewer 2: In Europe, many people take 4 weeks consecutive vacation in the summer. 2 weeks sounds good though.

> Retraction requires a simple majority vote of all voting members; if the vote results in a tie, the status quo is preserved and the +2 approval is retracted.

Author: >Regarding "retraction" - I think we should remove this language altogether. Any retraction should just be another major decision and follow the same process. Otherwise we get into arguments about what is a "retraction" and what isn't (sometimes it may be a partial retraction, or an addendum to the previous approval).

make sense. I will remove "retraction". Instead, we should initiate another "major decision" on the previous "+2" decision. The "roll forward" model simplifies the process.

Non-technical major decisions always require a formal simple majority vote.
Non-technical major decisions include:

>     * Modifications to the TSC or other governance documents

Reviewer 3: It is a bit odd that:

1. 2/3 majority is needed to adjust membership
2. 51% majority is needed to adjust the rules of voting

Rule 1 could be bypassed by a 51% vote to change the governance document. Should we align these two to either both be simple majority or both be 2/3 majority?

Reviewer 2: This seems wrong. Further up, we have this: "The TSC can amend this governance document by no less than a 2/3 affirmative vote."

Reviewer 3: Yeah, let's remove this line then to clarify that

Author: how about always require 2/3 vote on any governance decision, including adding new members, which I believe only require a simple majority previously. so technically speaking, always requiring 2/3 breaks compatibility but I feel that is more consistent and aligned with the spirit. I will make the change next for review.

    * Adding members to other roles within the Valkey project
    * Delegation of maintainership for projects to other groups or individuals

Any member of the TSC can call a vote with reasonable notice to the TSC, setting out a discussion period and a separate voting period.
Any discussion may be conducted in person or electronically by text, voice, or video.
The discussion shall be open to the public, with the notable exception of discussions involving embargoed security issues or the addition or removal of maintainers, which will be private.
In any vote, each voting TSC member will have one vote.
The TSC shall give at least two weeks for all members to submit their vote.
Except as specifically noted elsewhere in this document, decisions by vote require a simple majority vote of all voting members.
If a vote results in a tie, the status quo is preserved.

> It is the responsibility of the TSC Chair to help facilitate the voting process as needed to make sure it completes within the voting period.

Reviewer 2: Do we have a Chair? Should we spell out in the MAINTAINERS file who that is?

> It is the responsibility of the TSC Chair to help facilitate the voting process as needed to make sure it completes within the voting period.

Reviewer 4: I think we can make it in the MAINTAINERS .md file.

> It is the responsibility of the TSC Chair to help facilitate the voting process as needed to make sure it completes within the voting period.

Author: >Do we have a Chair? Should we spell out in the MAINTAINERS file who that is?

I believe it is @madolson :)

>I think we can make it in the MAINTAINERS .md file.

good point. will submit a separate PR

> It is the responsibility of the TSC Chair to help facilitate the voting process as needed to make sure it completes within the voting period.

Reviewer: Yeah, we discussed the chair but then never really did anything about it, I think it says me somewhere?

If consensus cannot be reached, the TSC shall make the decision by a vote.

A vote shall also be called when an issue or pull request is marked as a major decision, which are decisions that have a significant impact on the Valkey architecture or design.

### Technical Major Decisions

Technical major decisions include:
    * Fundamental changes to the Valkey core datastructures
    * Adding a new data structure or API
    * Changes that affect backward compatibility
    * New user visible fields that need to be maintained
    * Adding or removing a new external library such as a client or module to the project when it affects runtime behavior

Technical major decisions shall be approved by a simple majority vote whenever one can be obtained.

> If a simple majority cannot be reached within a two-week voting period, and no TSC member has cast a veto vote, the decision may instead be approved through explicit “+2” support from at least two TSC members, recorded on the relevant issue or pull request.

Reviewer 3: Should we clarify how a vote is instantiated? Does it have to be through GitHub (issue/PR/otherwise) or can it be through a messenger like Slack, etc? Ensuring these go through a stable channel will prevent someone from missing a decision and causing a +2 that they want to veto

Whichever one we choose, we can make it explicit when the two week countdown starts

Author: all the changes, including governance, are in the form of PR or issues so "A vote shall also be called when an issue or pull request is marked as a major decision" should suffice IMO. I don't think we need to codify the implementation details in the governance doc. we might switch to a different messaging or hosting platform for some weird reasons...

If the PR author or issue proposer is a TSC member, their +1 counts toward the +2.

> If any TSC member casts a veto vote, the decision must follow the simple majority voting process and cannot be approved through +2.

Reviewer 2: Minor regarding the "veto" wording: Veto normally means the right for a single person to block a decision. Here, it just means to block the +2 fast track and switch to majority instead. Maybe we shouldn't use the word veto?

I'm not sure what's better English, "vote against" or "negative vote"?

```suggestion
If a simple majority cannot be reached within a two-week voting period, and no TSC member has voted against, the decision may instead be approved through explicit “+2” support from at least two TSC members, recorded on the relevant issue or pull request.
If the PR author or issue proposer is a TSC member, their +1 counts toward the +2.
If any TSC member casts a negative vote, the decision must follow the simple majority voting process and cannot be approved through +2.
```
